faq: clarify another cause of Information schema is changed (#23129)
pingcap/docs: faq/sql-faq.md

### What triggers the `Information schema is changed` error?

> When executing SQL statements, TiDB determines the `schema` version of an object based on the isolation level and processes the SQL statement accordingly. TiDB also supports online asynchronous DDL changes. When you execute DML statements, there might be DDL statements being executed at the same time, and TiDB needs to ensure that each SQL statement is executed on the same `schema` version. Therefore, when executing DML, if a DDL operation is ongoing, TiDB might report an `Information schema is changed` error. In addition, in some concurrent DDL scenarios, after a DDL statement itself fails, TiDB checks whether the `schema` has changed before returning the original error. If the `schema` version used by that DDL statement is already behind the latest `schema` version, TiDB might also return this error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When executing SQL statements, TiDB determines the `schema` version of an object based on the isolation level and processes the SQL statement accordingly. TiDB also supports online asynchronous DDL changes. When you execute DML statements, other DDL statements might run concurrently, and TiDB needs to ensure that each SQL statement is executed on the same `schema` version. Therefore, when executing DML, if a DDL operation is ongoing, TiDB might report an `Information schema is changed` error. In addition, in some concurrent DDL scenarios, after a DDL statement fails, TiDB checks whether the `schema` has changed before returning the original error. If the `schema` version used by that DDL statement is already behind the latest `schema` version, TiDB might also return this error.
```

+ Cause 2: The DML operation goes on for a long time. During this period, many DDL statements have been executed, which causes more than 1024 `schema` version changes. You can modify this default value by modifying the `tidb_max_delta_schema_count` variable.
+ Cause 3: The TiDB server that accepts the DML request is not able to load `schema information` for a long time (possibly caused by the connection failure between TiDB and PD or TiKV). During this period, many DDL statements have been executed, which causes more than 100 `schema` version changes.
+ Cause 4: After TiDB restarts and before the first DDL operation is executed, the DML operation is executed and then encounters the first DDL operation (which means before the first DDL operation is executed, the transaction corresponding to the DML is started. And after the first `schema` version of the DDL is changed, the transaction corresponding to the DML is committed), this DML operation reports this error.

> + Cause 5: In some concurrent DDL scenarios, a DDL statement itself fails, and another DDL advances the global `schema` version during the same period. Before returning the original DDL error, TiDB checks whether the `schema` has changed. This check path might not carry the exact related table information, so it does not make a precise "same table or not" judgment. As long as the `schema` version used by the DDL statement is behind the latest `schema` version, the original DDL error might be converted to this error. Typical scenarios include concurrent `TRUNCATE TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` on the same table, or concurrent `RENAME TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` statements that compete on object state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Cause 5: In some concurrent DDL scenarios, a DDL statement itself fails, and another DDL statement advances the global `schema` version during the same period. Before returning the original DDL error, TiDB checks whether the `schema` has changed. This check path might not carry the exact related table information, so it does not make a precise "same table or not" judgment. As long as the `schema` version used by the DDL statement is behind the latest `schema` version, the original DDL error might be converted to this error. Typical scenarios include concurrent `TRUNCATE TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` on the same table, or concurrent `RENAME TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` statements that compete on object state.
```

> + Cause 5: In some concurrent DDL scenarios, a DDL statement itself fails, and another DDL statement advances the global `schema` version during the same period. Before returning the original DDL error, TiDB checks whether the `schema` has changed. This check path might not carry the exact related table information, so it does not make a precise "same table or not" judgment. As long as the `schema` version used by the DDL statement is behind the latest `schema` version, the original DDL error might be converted to this error. Typical scenarios include concurrent `TRUNCATE TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` on the same table, or concurrent `RENAME TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` statements that compete on object state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Cause 5: In some concurrent DDL scenarios, a DDL statement fails, and another DDL statement advances the global `schema` version during the same period. Before returning the original DDL error, TiDB checks whether the `schema` has changed. This check path might not carry the exact related table information, so it does not make a precise "same table or not" judgment. As long as the `schema` version used by the DDL statement is behind the latest `schema` version, the original DDL error might be converted to this error. Typical scenarios include concurrent `TRUNCATE TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` on the same table, or concurrent `RENAME TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` statements that compete on object state.
```

> In the preceding causes, Cause 1 directly depends on whether the tables involved in DML are the same as those involved in the ongoing DDL. Cause 5 occurs in some concurrent DDL scenarios, but its check path does not make a precise "same table or not" judgment. Cause 1 and Cause 2 do not impact the application, as the related DML operations retry after failure. For Cause 3, you need to check the network between TiDB and TiKV/PD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the preceding causes, Cause 1 directly depends on whether the tables involved in DML are the same as those involved in the ongoing DDL. Cause 5 occurs in some concurrent DDL scenarios, but its check path does not make a precise "same table or not" judgment. Cause 1 and Cause 2 do not affect the application, as TiDB retries the related DML operations after they fail. For Cause 3, you need to check the network between TiDB and TiKV/PD.
